doc/website/blog: versioned migrations (#2387)
ent/ent: doc/website/blog/tbd-announcing-versioned-migrations.md

---
title: Announcing Versioned Migrations
author: MasseElch
authorURL: "https://github.com/masseelch"
authorImageURL: "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/12862103?v=4"
image: tbd
---

> When [Ariel](https://github.com/a8m) released Ent v0.10.0 end of January,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When [Ariel](https://github.com/a8m) released Ent v0.10.0 at the end of January,
```

he [introduced](2022-01-20-announcing-new-migration-engine.md) a new migration engine for Ent based on another

> OpenSource tool called [Atlas](https://github.com/ariga/atlas). A month ago we added support for Atlas to generate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
open-source tool called [Atlas](https://github.com/ariga/atlas). A month ago we added support for Atlas to generate
```

> open-source tool called [Atlas](https://github.com/ariga/atlas). A month ago we added support for Atlas to generate

Reviewer 2: In this post, I want to showcase a new kind of migration workflow that has recently been added to Atlas and Ent. We call it "versioned migration authoring" and it's an attempt to combine the simplicity and expressiveness of the declarative approach with the safety and explicitness of versioned migrations. With versioned migration authoring, users still declare their desired state and use the Atlas engine to plan a safe migration from the existing to the new state. However, instead of coupling the planning and execution of this plan, it is instead written into a file which can be checked into source control, fine tuned manually and reviewed in normal code review processes.

The very first thing to do, is to make sure you have an up-to-date Ent version:

```shell
go get -u entgo.io/ent@master
```

There are two ways to have Ent generate migration files for schema changes. The first one is to use an instantiated Ent
client and the second one to generate the changes from a parsed schema graph. This post will take the second approach,
if you want to learn how to use the first one you can have a look at
the [documentation](./docs/versioned-migrations#from-client).

### Generating Versioned Migration Files

Since we have enabled the versioned migrations feature now, let's create a small schema and generate the initial set of
migration files. Consider the following schema for a fresh Ent project:

```go title="ent/schema/user.go"
package schema

import (
	"entgo.io/ent"
	"entgo.io/ent/schema/field"
	"entgo.io/ent/schema/index"
)

// User holds the schema definition for the User entity.
type User struct {
	ent.Schema
}

// Fields of the User.
func (User) Fields() []ent.Field {
	return []ent.Field{
		field.String("username"),
	}
}

// Indexes of the User.
func (User) Indexes() []ent.Index {
	return []ent.Index{
		index.Fields("username").Unique(),
	}
}

```

> As I told you earlier, wa want to use the parsed schema graph to compute the difference between our schema and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As I stated before, we want to use the parsed schema graph to compute the difference between our schema and the
```

connected database. Here is an example of a (semi-)persistent MySQL docker container to use if you want to follow along:

```shell
docker run --rm --name ent-versioned-migrations --detach --env MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=pass --env MYSQL_DATABASE=ent -p 3306:3306 mysql
```

> Once you are done you can shut down the container and remove all resources with `docker stop ent-versioned-migrations`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you are done, you can shut down the container and remove all resources with `docker stop ent-versioned-migrations`.
```

> Now, let's create a small function, that loads the schema graph and generates the migration files. Create a new Go file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's create a small function that loads the schema graph and generates the migration files. Create a new Go file
```

named `main.go` and copy the following contents:

```go title="main.go"
package main

import (
	"context"
	"log"
	"os"

	"ariga.io/atlas/sql/migrate"
	"entgo.io/ent/dialect/sql"
	"entgo.io/ent/dialect/sql/schema"
	"entgo.io/ent/entc"
	"entgo.io/ent/entc/gen"
	_ "github.com/go-sql-driver/mysql"
)

func main() {
	// We need a name for the new migration file.
	if len(os.Args) < 2 {
		log.Fatalln("no name given")
	}
	// Create a local migration directory.
	dir, err := migrate.NewLocalDir("migrations")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln(err)
	}
	// Load the graph.
	graph, err := entc.LoadGraph("./ent/schema", &gen.Config{})
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln(err)
	}
	tbls, err := graph.Tables()
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln(err)
	}
	// Open connection to the database.
	drv, err := sql.Open("mysql", "root:pass@tcp(localhost:3306)/ent")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln(err)
	}
	// Inspect the current database state and compare it with the graph.
	m, err := schema.NewMigrate(drv, schema.WithDir(dir))
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln(err)
	}
	if err := m.NamedDiff(context.Background(), os.Args[1], tbls...); err != nil {
		log.Fatalln(err)
	}
}
```

> Everything we have to do now is creating the migration directory and executing the above Go file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All we have to do now is create the migration directory and execute the above Go file:
```

  -lock-timeout N  Allow N seconds to acquire database lock (default 15)
  -verbose         Print verbose logging
  -version         Print version
  -help            Print usage

Commands:
  create [-ext E] [-dir D] [-seq] [-digits N] [-format] NAME
               Create a set of timestamped up/down migrations titled NAME, in directory D with extension E.
               Use -seq option to generate sequential up/down migrations with N digits.
               Use -format option to specify a Go time format string.
  goto V       Migrate to version V
  up [N]       Apply all or N up migrations
  down [N]     Apply all or N down migrations
  drop         Drop everything inside database
  force V      Set version V but don't run migration (ignores dirty state)
  version      Print current migration version
```

Now we can execute our initial migration and sync the database with our schema:

```shell
migrate -source 'file://migrations' -database 'mysql://root:pass@tcp(localhost:3306)/ent' up
```
```text
<timestamp>/u initial (349.256951ms)
```

### Workflow

Using versioned migrations is especially useful, if you have to execute advanced SQL statements, need to create data

> dependant migration steps or need to ship some seeding data with a change. To show an example of the latter, we create a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dependent migration steps, or need to ship some seeding data with a change. To show an example of the latter, we create a
```

> new migration, that adds a Group schema and an admin user in the database. We do it in two steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new migration, that adds a Group schema and an admin user in the database. We will do this in two steps:
```

func (Group) Edges() []ent.Edge {
	return []ent.Edge{
		edge.To("users", User.Type),
	}
}

// Indexes of the Group.
func (Group) Indexes() []ent.Index {
	return []ent.Index{
		index.Fields("name").Unique(),
	}
}
```
Once the schema is updated, create a new set of migration files.

```shell
go run -mod=mod main.go add_group_schema
```

Once again there will bew two new files in the `migrations` directory: `<timestamp>_add_group_schema.down.sql`
and `<timestamp>_add_group_schema.up.sql`.

```sql title="<timestamp>_add_group_schema.down.sql"
DROP TABLE `group_users`;
DROP TABLE `groups`;
```

```sql title="<timestamp>_add_group_schema.up.sql"
CREATE TABLE `groups` (`id` bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT, `name` varchar(191) NOT NULL, PRIMARY KEY (`id`), UNIQUE INDEX `group_name` (`name`)) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_bin;
CREATE TABLE `group_users` (`group_id` bigint NOT NULL, `user_id` bigint NOT NULL, PRIMARY KEY (`group_id`, `user_id`), CONSTRAINT `group_users_group_id` FOREIGN KEY (`group_id`) REFERENCES `groups` (`id`) ON DELETE CASCADE, CONSTRAINT `group_users_user_id` FOREIGN KEY (`user_id`) REFERENCES `users` (`id`) ON DELETE CASCADE) CHARSET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_bin;
```

> You can now either edit the generated files to add the seed data or create new files for it. I chose the latter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can either edit the generated files to add the seed data or create new files for it. I chose the latter:
```

```shell
migrate create -format unix -ext sql -dir migrations seed_admin
```
```text
[...]/ent-versioned-migrations/migrations/<timestamp>_seed_admin.up.sql
[...]/ent-versioned-migrations/migrations/<timestamp>_seed_admin.down.sql
```

> You can now edit those files and adds statements to create an admin Group and User.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now edit those files and add statements to create an admin Group and User.
```

)

// User holds the schema definition for the User entity.
type User struct {
	ent.Schema
}

// Fields of the User.
func (User) Fields() []ent.Field {
	return []ent.Field{
		field.String("username"),
	}
}

// Edges of the User.
func (User) Edges() []ent.Edge {
	return []ent.Edge{
		edge.From("groups", Group.Type).
			Ref("users"),
	}
}

// Indexes of the User.
func (User) Indexes() []ent.Index {
	return []ent.Index{
		index.Fields("username").Unique(),
	}
}
```

```go title="ent/schema/group.go"
package schema

import (
	"entgo.io/ent"
	"entgo.io/ent/schema/edge"
	"entgo.io/ent/schema/field"
	"entgo.io/ent/schema/index"
)

// Group holds the schema definition for the Group entity.
type Group struct {
	ent.Schema
}

// Fields of the Group.
func (Group) Fields() []ent.Field {
	return []ent.Field{
		field.String("name"),
	}
}

// Edges of the Group.
func (Group) Edges() []ent.Edge {
	return []ent.Edge{
		edge.To("users", User.Type),
	}
}

// Indexes of the Group.
func (Group) Indexes() []ent.Index {
	return []ent.Index{
		index.Fields("name").Unique(),
	}
}
```
Once the schema is updated, create a new set of migration files.

```shell
go run -mod=mod main.go add_group_schema
```

> Once again there will bew two new files in the `migrations` directory: `<timestamp>_add_group_schema.down.sql`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once again there will be two new files in the `migrations` directory: `<timestamp>_add_group_schema.down.sql`
```

fact it has served the Ent framework very well in the past few years. However, database migrations are a very sensitive
topic, and many projects require a more controlled approach.

For this reason, most industry standard solutions, like [Flyway](https://flywaydb.org/)
, [Liquibase](https://liquibase.org/), or [golang-migrate/migrate](https://github.com/golang-migrate/migrate) (which is
common in the Go ecosystem), support a workflow that they call "versioned migrations".

With versioned migrations, you assign each migration (commonly a set of SQL files) a unique version and a description
and check those files into version control together with your application code. Versioned migrations are then applied in
order exactly once on your database.

> Liquibase is an open-source database schema change management solution which enables you to manage revisions of your 
> database changes easily. Liquibase makes it easy for anyone involved in the application release process to:
>
> - Eliminate errors and delays when releasing databases.
> - Deploy and roll back changes for specific versions without needing to know what has already been deployed.

> > - Deploy database and application changes together so they always stay in sync.

Reviewer 2: Needs some segue into the self-description of another project. Also, I would take a definition of versioned migrations or some description of the mechanism instead of the general "marketing copy" of the project. The point is to use others' words to explain the concept of versioned migrations.

Author: They don't really have a description :cry:

Author: @rotemtam I added a description of it in my own words now. I cannot find a good explanation on the mentioned tools' docs.

In this post, I want to showcase a new kind of migration workflow that has recently been added to Atlas and Ent. We call
it "versioned migration authoring" and it's an attempt to combine the simplicity and expressiveness of the declarative
approach with the safety and explicitness of versioned migrations. With versioned migration authoring, users still
declare their desired state and use the Atlas engine to plan a safe migration from the existing to the new state.
However, instead of coupling the planning and execution , it is instead written into a file which can be

> checked into source control, fine tuned manually and reviewed in normal code review processes. 

Reviewer 4: 💯
